[WHOOSH]
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> With only one
sacred peak remaining,
Jeff and Jan's relationship
is left in the balance.
And this far into
our journey, Anand
seems to be more willing to
share the harsh realities.
But those who want to find
freedom, to find truth,
realize that means
no more hiding.
Not in the words, not in the
mind, and not in the stories.
>> A lot of times when I
would sit with my master,
he rarely talked.
He rarely spoke sometimes.
Rarely.
I would go every day.
Maybe he would say
something profound.
Nothing but absolute silence.
Some of the greatest teachings
I have got was in that silence.
But silence of the mouth and
the chattering of the mind
is destructive.
Then it's better you speak.
But a lot of time, you
see, the mind is going.
We are not speaking, but
the mind is speaking.
And we are caught in it.
Otherwise, one of the biggest
problems when two people relate
is, oh, you misunderstand me.
You don't understand me.
But true silence by its
very nature is very present.
And if two people are
relating in silence,
then they cannot
misunderstand each other.
[CAR HORN]
[ENERGETIC MUSIC]
This is not a journey
to feel better.
Do you understand?
You come here to transcend.
[FOOTSTEPS]
>> Yeah, silence, being
truly together in silence.
I mean, I've always had
that black metal, punk rock,
drone noise, guard your soul.
You know, I like silence.
I realized today
maybe even though I
am silent with Jennifer,
I feel comfortable.
Maybe I'm not truly
attentive to our needs.
So she's awesome and I love her.
>> After nearly 18 days together
with nonstop road killer
traffic, motorcycling, hiking to
all these sacred sites at high
altitude, I think the trip
is beginning to catch up with
a few of us.
We might be starting
to lose our minds.
>> This is our--
this is like our
MTV "Real World."
>> This is a talk show.
>> This is our-- no, this
is our little lounge.
We're all pointing
to the same thing.
The only difference between
"The Real World" and us
is we're all journaling.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> They're having bitch
fights, and we're all like,
(HIGH-PITCHED VOICE)
today, I explored the air.
>> [LAUGHTER]
>> And Kahlil Gibran would say
that anger is the love juice
of the lotus.
>> [LAUGHTER]
>> It's a major difference
between a reality show and what
we do here.
[LAUGHS] That one's true.
This is our drama,
like, lounge, where
the real shit talking happens.
>> Are you so tired that
your humor is going down
the gutters?
>> [LAUGHS]
>> I can't believe he said that.
>> [LAUGHTER]
>> About you, Katrina.
>> Wow.
You're going to take
that from a Buddha?
>> You had a shower, right?
>> I had a shower.
>> You're squeaky clean.
>> Which kind do you do?
I did the bucket shower.
>> You know, I kind
of like the blend.
I like to get it
scalding hot and then
have a little bit of
cold running on me.
So then I have the cold,
and then I throw the hot on,
and it's like this amazing
experience that happens.
[LAUGHTER]
>> This is the real life.
>> And when I'm done showering,
I take my sesame seed oil.
You think I'm kidding.
I'm not.
Put on.
Yeah.
>> What does the
sesame seed oil do?
>> You know, it's good for
lots of reasons, you know?
Protecting your aura.
>> [LAUGHTER]
>> It's happening.
>> See, when guys take a
shower, what I do is I take
my underwear off,
and I soak them up.
And then I use the underwear
to wipe my body off.
>> [LAUGHTER]
>> And then I rinse out the
underwear, so you're done,
just like that.
I mean, I can show you.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> It's drying on
the heater right now.
You want to check it out?
>> [LAUGHTER]
>> Wow.
The truth, I love it.
This is really drama central.
>> [LAUGHTER]
>> Crazy.
>> Today, we head out
to our last sacred peak,
Hemkund Sahib and the Hidden
Valley of the Flowers.
Hemkund Sahib is a place
of service, of community,
and unity with each
other and the divine.
To get there, we have a windy
and rocky 25-kilometer ride
to the town of Govind Ghat.
From there, we hike
up 13 kilometers,
traversing 5,000
feet vertically just
to get to the base camp village.
>> I see some of you have been
saying we've been going, going,
going.
But that's the journey, yeah?
But to find stillness
in dynamism is the key.
And that's one of the biggest
arcs of our world that we need,
is can movement and
stillness coexist?
Can that expansion
and humility coexist?
But that's how
nature is, you see?
In nature, nature
is never still.
Look around.
It's never still.
There's always
movement in nature.
Yet it is never restless.
And that's one of the great
teachings or the invitation
or vision is to refine that art.
There is the last mountains
we're climbing for this journey
before we head back to the
magnificent land of Rishikesh.
You've all ridden beautifully,
supported each other.
Continue that.
Stay present.
Stay connected to the source.
And be here.
Do not already imagine
yourself, OK, we are at the end.
Do not let the mind
travel to the future.
Stay right here, present.
[CHANTING]
>> It was challenging when we
came down the mountain and we
ran out of gas.
And then we're just gliding.
And that moment of being
in neutral, which was
great for Ken in that moment.
But for me I was
like, oh my god.
Just like this loss of control.
And I was like, shit, shit,
shit, and saying it out loud.
Like, slow down.
I'm not comfortable with this.
And I didn't want to
freak him out as well.
Like, I understand
the energy exchange.
But it was very hard for me
to chill out and be at peace
with gliding down the
mountain and not knowing
where the gas station is.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> Oh, we've come all the
way down to Govind Ghat right
there.
I guess we go up here.
>> So we're going to make a
left turn here pretty soon?
>> Yeah.
>> Right on.
Valley of Flowers, here we come.
>> This is the element
of organization.
Black and white
map with a couple
town names you can't pronounce.
>> [LAUGHTER]
>> Where are we going?
Yeah.
>> And we just got
the map two days ago.
>> [LAUGHS]
>> Everyone seems
in good spirits.
Despite Ken running out of
gas and Tiffany's fears,
he had the ride of his life.
And we simply siphoned
gas from my bike to his.
Elle is riding well, and
even carries her mechanic
on the back of her bike.
And Fred continues
to push onward
like his normal courageous self.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
As we arrived in town, I
had the rare opportunity
to finally challenge
the locals to a race.
It's not often that I have the
chance to be the fastest rider.
[EXCITED TALKING]
From here at the town of
Govind Ghat at 6,000 feet,
we'll embark on a
13-kilometer trek
to the base camp of Hemkund
Sahib at 11,400 feet.
From here, we can go to the
Hidden Valley of the Flowers,
or we can take the nearly
4,000-foot vertical hike
to the temple in Glacier
Lake at 15,200 feet.
For this part of
the hike, the key
is to get up there
before nightfall,
so some of the riders
decide to take mules
instead of hoofing it on foot.
But it's clear, riding the mules
isn't as easy or safe as one
might think.
Mark takes an early fall,
his size way too much
to handle for this mule.
And Elle, her mule bucks her
off as well after her guide
persisted in hitting
the mule to go faster.
>> He bucked me off.
>> Up, up.
>> He was kicking it,
banging it, yanking it.
And it just-- it
just retaliated.
But now it's cool.
Yeah.
Got back on it.
Gave it love.
And I told the--
him if he hit it again,
I was going to hit him.
[LAUGHS] So.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> So when you wake up, all of
these are massive mountains.
We are in a little valley,
surrounded by high Himalayas.
Can you imagine?
11,000 feet.
We are at 11,000 feet.
Just walking.
No access road, nothing.
How did they build
all of this stuff?
Right?
>> Must have taken a long time.
>> This is all built by hand.
Three stories.
Four stories.
Look at this structure.
All by hand.
>> A lot of people have to hit
rock bottom to figure out what
has to change.
I was one of those people.
It happened to me.
You know, we all go
through those black periods
in our life.
And at one point
in my life, someone
has taken that
strength away from me.
Really made me afraid
of confrontation,
and just as much because my
anger is not always bridled,
you know?
And I say nasty things right
off the top of my mind.
Works that way.
It's quick and it's not
always the best thing to say,
but it's what comes out of me.
So what I've
trained myself to do
or what I've been trained
to do over the last however
many years is to just sit and
be quiet, and take it and just
wad it off in that little
ball and just deal with it.
It's easier than having the
confrontation, you know?
>> Tomorrow, we'll make the
nearly 5,000-foot vertical hike
to our last sacred
peak, Hemkund Sahib,
the important Sikh
temple in Glacier Lake.
But today, we journey
into the mountains,
to the Hidden Valley
of the Flowers.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> You know, you have all
that freedom here that you
don't have at home, that
you've got to be the dad
and you've got to step
up and lay down the rules
for the kids.
I was talking to Anand once.
I talked to him about
some of the problems
I have with my 12-year-old,
and that he could get violent
with me.
He's pushed me.
And Anand's first question
was, what does his dad do?
That's always somebody's
first question,
is, what does the dad do?
And I kind of have
to say, I don't know.
And so I'm hoping that
that's something that Anand
would talk to Jeff about.
That could be a
man-to-man discussion
those two could have that
I think would really help,
because Jeff thinks he's,
like, in the middle,
between me and Draven,
when actually he
needs to be with me.
We have to be on the same team.
>> So today, I had
an ass kicking day,
spiritually and emotionally.
So kind of it all started
out with the whole breakfast
scenario as people
are bitching, you
know, because we had
basically naan for breakfast.
>> I'm the type of person
that when I exercise,
I make sure I have protein.
I have fruit or whatever.
And this morning we just had
what was essentially bread.
And so I wasn't
happy about that.
I have eaten out of
trash cans, you know?
So I don't need the middle
to upper class experience
where I show gratitude through
only having this little bit,
and then I go back to my life.
I know what it is like
to have nothing to eat.
And that just was the straw
that broke the camel's back.
And I said, look.
You know, I'm rich.
If I wanted to, I could leave,
and I can eat filet mignon
right now at 8 o'clock
in the morning,
so don't talk to me about
fake middle class gratitude.
And that I think was
the moment, you know?
All of the minor irritations
culminated into that one little
smack comment, you know?
And it was silence at the table.
I think that was
my angriest moment.
Like, everything that I've
experienced just all--
from life just all came
crashing into my response
to that comment.
>> In relating that story
to Anand on the way up
to the Valley of
the Flowers today,
I told him I just kind of
more or less wanted to get up
and leave.
And he turned on
me, and not mad,
but in that unique
kind of Anand way.
Kind of a scolding
way, you know?
He said to me,
you're a nice guy,
but you don't always have
to be a fucking nice guy.
>> What is your intention
for the journey?
What was your intention to come?
What did you put in
the fire last night?
>> I want peace.
Peace for myself and
the people I love.
>> And why do you think
you may lack full peace?
>> I never feel it.
>> Because you don't
accept your power.
There's a part of
you you're denying,
suppressing, afraid of it.
>> I am afraid of it.
>> Until you don't accept that,
till you don't embrace that,
you won't experience peace.
And this journey for
you is about that.
>> Yeah.
You know, people at
home were more excited
about this than me, because
I've been afraid of this.
>> Exactly.
You're afraid of who you
are, the truth of who
you are, because you
know that's powerful.
And you think you won't
be able to handle it.
Do you understand?
>> Yes.
>> You think that you need
to prove yourself to know
that's who you are.
You need to accept that.
You don't need to become that.
And that's why you are afraid.
You think you can't
become it, that it's
a becoming, that you will fail.
It's not a becoming.
It's you getting out of
your way, you accepting it.
Not believing those
toxic thoughts
that float around in your mind
of self-denial, of insecurity,
or fear of failure.
>> I also fear hurting people.
>> And you can't.
That's just a defense mechanism,
because you are afraid to fail.
So then a thought comes.
I don't do that
because I'm afraid to.
I'm afraid of hurting people.
Do you comprehend?
It's attached to that fear.
So it's convenient for me to
just remain in my comfort zone.
The magic always happens outside
of your comfort zone, Ryan.
That's where peace lies.
Not in the box.
It's just a convenient
thought attached to that fear.
I don't want to, because I
don't want to hurt people.
No.
By being in that space,
you are hurting people,
because you're letting them
continue in the toxicity.
Do you understand?
In your presence.
This morning, when they were
going into their toxicity--
oh, my husband is so rich, I
can bring a helicopter here.
Oh my god.
Somebody dare say
that in my presence.
That's why they all sneak out.
If they have the courage,
let them say it around me.
Why would they not say
that in front of me?
Tell me.
>> Because you'd tell them.
>> Exactly.
But they need validation.
That's why they're
speaking in front of you,
so that they can feel validated.
And then these toxic
thoughts are validated.
Do you comprehend?
>> Yes.
>> They become real
to their people.
They become part of
their personality.
They become part
of their nature.
And then they
throw it everywhere
they go, even in a
magnificent space like this.
You're talking about,
my husband is so rich,
he can send a helicopter to
pick me up and I can go eat.
These people are animals
who are eating here.
So there, you're hurting.
Do you comprehend?
>> Yes.
>> You're hurting the planet.
You're hurting the
soul of the planet.
That's why our
world doesn't change
with so many wonderful,
good people like you.
>> Thank you.
>> Because you need
to accept your power.
Yeah?
>> Yeah.
>> Take this time to
really-- once we stop,
you need to speak up.
Yeah?
>> OK.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
>> We are approaching towards
the end of the journey, yeah?
So-- at least up here.
Then we'll be in Rishikesh
for three or four days.
We have a lot of
integration [NON-ENGLISH]..
But it's important for you to be
aware of your intention, yeah?
And to be aware that you
are not on a visit to India
to Golden Triangle,
organized by a tour operator.
Do you understand?
Let just that be clear.
That's the trip you all came on.
This is a journey for learning.
This is a journey for expanding.
This is a journey
for transcendence.
Be aware of that.
I have a very young body,
which likes to eat also.
I'm eating the
same thing you are.
So grow up.
We are on a spiritual journey,
and I want spirituality
only till it comes in
package, in the box I want.
It's not Costco.
We are not at Costco
or Barneys or Nordstrom
or any shopping mall, all right?
We are on a journey
of transformation.
Every little opportunity
I'll take to test you.
We'll do the teaching, and then
within the next hour or two,
you will get the opportunity
to practice the teaching.
Otherwise, we can sit and all we
can do is I can keep teaching.
Do you understand?
And we can keep
reading from scriptures
and I can talk about
transcendental reality and all
of that.
And you say, wow.
All of that.
And then what alters?
We are still the same.
Just new vocabulary.
New information in the mind.
Nothing within us has altered.
We are the same people.
Magic will only happen
outside of your comfort zone.
Somebody said to me,
oh, I was expecting
we would do more yoga.
This is yoga.
Yoga is [NON-ENGLISH].
The sensation of self is yoga.
The transcendence
of self is yoga,
towards transcendence of
the mind, its reactions,
its calculations, its
agendas, its expectations.
The conditioned self,
the transcendence
of the conditioned self
is the beginning of yoga.
Not the stretching.
That's just called stretching.
Don't call it yoga.
Call it stretching.
Some will be triggered
by something.
Some others will be triggered.
Not one thing will
trigger everybody, right?
None of it is personal.
But these are
opportunities to practice,
to really look at self,
that at, how does self
react at these moments?
This is not a journey to feel
better, do you understand?
You come here to transcend.
We come here to expand,
not just to put Band-Aids.
We come here to go deeper.
And that's what we test.
What if our attention is taken?
What takes our attention?
When we get up, as we
sit around the table,
what do we talk
about in those gaps?
What are our conversations?
What are we giving
our attention to?
Gossiping, cribbing, grouping.
It's life at play,
right here, right now.
And that's where
we get to practice,
because there is no escaping.
We can think about it, but
all of us here, none of us
is that weak to
escape, to run away.
We are all here, very strong.
And none of it is personal.
I'm not talking to a
personal individual.
We are talking about states of
consciousness, states of mind,
states of unconscious mind.
And when we are in
a group, when we
are in a collective
village like this,
it's our dharma,
our duty, to not
engage in the downward
progression of somebody.
Do you understand?
Sympathy is not compassion.
Sympathy just adds
to the pain body.
Do you comprehend?
Pity and sympathy are a
degradation of human spirit.
When you pity somebody,
you degrade them.
You take away their dignity.
When you sympathize,
you join their misery.
It expands.
And that's where most
humanity hovers around.
Pity and sympathy?
Oh, yeah.
Because so that we can belong.
Compassion might not seem
sometimes gentle or kind.
It goes much deeper.
Sometimes it will express
itself as fire, very abrupt.
So it's our duty when
we are in a group
and in a journey
like this to be aware
that we are here to evolve.
And if somebody is
stuck in an altered
or a downward progression
of consciousness,
that you serve that individual,
that we serve that individual.
Do you hear me, Ryan?
To help or serve
that person who is
stuck in that state
of consciousness
to come out of it,
because that's what
we are here all together for.
Do you hear me?
Otherwise, three people
here or two people there,
and then they're talking
about those people there.
And energetically,
you can sense it.
What, do you think I'm blind?
I can do this with my
eyes closed and ears shut.
>> And when we're so clearly
seeing our egos' conditioning
exposed, will our group of
Ryan, Jeff, Elle, all of us,
will we move to
protect and fear,
or will we expand
and find freedom?
>> So it is our duty.
It is our dharma.
It's our responsibility
not only to ourselves,
but each and every one.
Don't underestimate
how deeply you
can impact everybody's journey
just by the way you are being.
[MUSIC PLAYING]
[SINGING]
>> You know, how deep do I
want to pierce them and inspire
them?
Or do I want to hurt them
and leave casualties?
>> Walk with purpose, and
then I go back to the chant.
And then it was like,
walk with purpose.
>> The wise Buddha inside
has all mad the choice,
and then the mind has just
caught up this whole trip.
[LAUGHS] We're halfway
through the hike.
Here we go.
[SINGING]